----- 
permalink: "37"
filters_pre: 
- redcloth
title: Some updates
comments: []

date: 2006-07-25 03:07:00 +02:00
tags: 
- website
- cakephp
- design
type: article
toc: true
-----
Quite a bit of time passed since the last blog post, and I'm actually sorry about that, but as I thought, I don't have as much free time as I used to be. Work is work, after all!
This post will be multipurpose as actually I bluid up a few things to write about in the last few days... erhm, ok, _weeks_.

h3. New Website Design

Something different eh? Yep, definitely! Some time ago I started a small project called "h3raLd.com Re-design":http://base--/projects/view/h3rald-redesign hoping that some GFX guru could provide a new template for this website, and actually in the end I decided to accept the work of _*Bartus F. Teipel*_ a Brazilian CakePHP enthusiast.
Bartus is obviously (MUCH) more talented than me when it comes to design, and I was amazed at the quality of the template he provided, in a really short time. 
Unfortunately he didn't yet provide a link to his main website/portfolio, but for now all I can show you is his website for party pics, "CircusCircus":http://www.circuscircus.com.br/.

The new template sports a more contemporary Web2.0-ish look which I like a lot, and Bartus used libraries like "prototype":http://prototype.conio.net/, "moo.fx":http://moofx.mad4milk.net/ and "Nifty Corners Cube":http://www.html.it/articoli/niftycube/index.html for the AJAX effects and functionalities. 
A really outstanding work, thanks Bartus!

h3. The CakePHP Herald project has been completed

With my "latest article":http://www.h3rald.com/articles/view/cakephp-first-bite/ about CakePHP published on SitePoint, the "CakePHP Herald":http://base--/projects/view/cakephp-herald/ project was completed.
I must say that I really enjoyed writing all those articles about CakePHP, and the only thing I regret is not to have written anything (yet) about some more advanced topic about CakePHP. This was mostly due to - again - lack of time to focus on advanced topic and produce some quality examples.

However, judging by the positive feedback I received about the articles, I am really happy of the final result: even more people discovered the power of CakePHP and became _bakers_. Happy baking to all of you!

_So... no more articles about Cake?_ Maybe not for a while, I think I'll be rather busy in the following months. Curious? Read on :-)

h3. My biggest and most important project

I actually got really pissed off with Larry, Garret & the other Master Bakers because of what they wrote on the "announcement":http://cakeforge.org/forum/forum.php?forum_id=244 for the latest CakePHP release:

bq. "[...]In other news, some new articles were published on Sitepoint [3] and in the International PHP magazine [4]. Fabio Cevasco [5] is the man behind these articles. Together with Fabio, we will be writing a book that will be published [...]"

After all this time I spent _trying desperately not to say a word about it_ they came out and heralded it out of nowhere. Sigh... they ruined the surprise effect! Oh well, it's too late now, isn't it? 

So yes, when I say that I'm spending at least 60% of my time (at work and at home) writing I really mean it. The rest? Well, I do have a lovely girlfriend after all!!!
