----- 
permalink: "42"
filters_pre: 
- redcloth
title: Too many cooks spoil the Cake book
comments: 
- :date: 2007-06-25 14:19:09 +02:00
  :author: anon
  :url: ""
  :id: 7
  :body: where did all the comments go?
- :date: 2007-06-25 14:35:50 +02:00
  :author: Fabio Cevasco
  :url: ""
  :id: 8
  :body: |-
    All the comments of the old version of the site were not migrated due to the high volume of spam (last time I counted 9000+ records in the database, just in the comments table) and the impossibility of filtering the real comments.
    
    Feel free to re-start the whole thing all over again, _if you must_. I'd rather move on.
- :date: 2007-07-07 16:40:01 +02:00
  :author: needish
  :url: ""
  :id: 13
  :body: Why don't you publish the book online? You could even charge a few bucks for a PDF version. I think that probably most people wouldn't care about Cake foundation sponsorship.
- :date: 2007-07-07 23:08:59 +02:00
  :author: Nate Todd
  :url: http://natetodd.com
  :id: 14
  :body: |-
    I agree with needish.
    
    I would gladly fork over some cash for a resource that provides well-commented and thought-out code examples.  The one gripe I have with Cake is the dearth of applicable and up-to-date resources.
- :date: 2007-07-08 02:43:29 +02:00
  :author: Fabio Cevasco
  :url: http://www.h3rald.com
  :id: 16
  :body: "Thanks a lot for your suggestions and offers, but no.\n\
    Although I still think CakePHP is a great framework for PHP, I totally lost interest in it. \n\n\
    And besides, the book was never finished simply because nearly all the code examples where never provided by the Cake Software Foundation, so the few chapters I wrote would be kinda useless to the community now. "
- :date: 2007-07-08 11:33:27 +02:00
  :author: Tom
  :url: http://www.concepthue.com/blog
  :id: 17
  :body: |-
    I agree as well, I would like to see a PDF version available online -- even if it isn't complete. 
    
    There is such little documentation for CakePHP that I feel it turns many folks away and I find myself asking way too many questions in the irc channel lol to gwoo's dismay sometimes. 
    
    I would love to get as many perspectives, examples, and thoughts as possible because I believe CakePHP is really good and should be promoted. Especially if it's ever gonna "make it"
- :date: 2007-07-08 12:06:41 +02:00
  :author: Fabio Cevasco
  :url: http://www.h3rald.com
  :id: 18
  :body: |-
    Believe me, if you asked me months ago I would have contributed to expand Cake's documentation and write more articles about it quite willingly.
    
    But as I said, at the moment I'd like to contribute to other projects where I'm actually appreciated. 
    
    I know Cake lacks of documentation, but the Cake Team lost a writer and contributor four months ago, and I'm sure things won't improve if they keep dealing with people in the same way.
    
    I know I keep going on about this, and I know I sound quite offensive sometimes, but I'm sure at least some of you can understand how this can be a "hot topic" for me.
    I'd be glad to see Cake moving forward and "make it", although I will *not* do anything anymore to make that happen.
- :date: 2007-07-08 23:56:34 +02:00
  :author: anon
  :url: ""
  :id: 19
  :body: |-
    Good thing the Internet Archive still has a copy of the lost comments
    
    http://web.archive.org/web/20070309125512/www.h3rald.com/blog/view/42/
- :date: 2007-07-09 00:16:34 +02:00
  :author: Dan
  :url: ""
  :id: 20
  :body: |-
    What a shame... I was really looking forward to that book!
    
    Btw, the new site design looks good...
- :date: 2007-07-09 05:26:37 +02:00
  :author: Fabio Cevasco
  :url: http://www.h3rald.com/
  :id: 21
  :body: |-
    @anon: Thanks. Now I hope you are not going to copy and paste them all back here, at least!
    Sorry for the delay in showing your comment on the site btw, Askimet marked it as spam - posts with a link and nearly no meaningful content normally end up that way, I suspect :P
- :date: 2007-07-25 10:15:55 +02:00
  :author: Manny
  :url: ""
  :id: 32
  :body: |
    I just came across your post.
    
    That totally sucks because cake's doc's SUCK huge. I would have considered using cake since people have been going on about how good it is because it's based on Rails.
    
    BTW, I don't have time to spend shifting through their API or searching newsgroup or dealing with some of the unfriendly "bakers". There's a huge difference between 1.1 and 1.2.
    
    I'm going to checkout Symfony.
    

- :date: 2007-08-11 04:35:14 +02:00
  :author: Joan Piedra
  :url: ""
  :id: 44
  :body: |-
    Hello Fabio,
    
    It looks like I'm kinda late in this discussion, I remember I saw your book cover once, and was looking forward to buy it.
    
    After reading your comments, it seems you have lost all your interest in this project. Still I'd like to recommend you two ideas.
    
    1. Look for another publisher that is more interested in open source software like Packt, they have done a nice job with the new jQuery book.
    
    2. If it doesn't interest you anymore, you could 'free' the book, make it open source as an 'open book'. Then see how the cakephp community and open source magic works.
    
    Hope this book can get some light at last.
    
    My best regards,
    Joan Piedra
- :date: 2007-09-14 08:13:51 +02:00
  :author: dustman
  :url: ""
  :id: 71
  :body: i myself knew that feeling yo got with cakephp core dev team, at least one or two persons... too sad man...  but the happiest of it that now i'm converted to python :)
- :date: 2007-11-10 01:54:12 +01:00
  :author: Fred Jones
  :url: ""
  :id: 119
  :body: I don't know if I agree with posting a blog post like this. Sue them for damages.
date: 2007-03-07 02:45:00 +01:00
tags: 
- cakephp
- writing
type: article
toc: true
-----
I am sorry to announce that my upcoming book, CakePHP Recipes, will not be published anymore. As a matter of fact, it wasn't finished because some of the people involved failed to comply with the terms of their contract in delivering material which was suitable for publication.

To quote an email I received from my publisher a few days ago,

_"[...] The Cake Software Foundation has informed us they are withdrawing from the CakePHP Recipes project, and returning the advances they've received. This means we can no longer count on them for support, nor can we package the book as an official title._

_After careful consideration, we have determined that this renders the book no longer viable for us. So, regrettably we must cancel your contract as well. Please understand that we have no quarrel with your performance; you have been responsive and communicative for the entire time. [...]"_

This is a huge disappointment to me, in particular because I am not responsible for the cancellation. It was going to be my very first book to be published, and due to someone else's misjudgement and lack of motivation it will never be available to the readers.
I do not want to put the blame the whole Cake Software Foundation for this: nearly every person involved in the project did his best in reviewing parts of the book or offering me support. Regrettably this wasn't enough: unfortunately it seems that someone didn't like the idea of me writing the book and kept doubting not only my coding skills but also my ability as a writer all along. 

It is sad to see how certain individuals fail to understand the importance of marketing and public relations not only when working on a team project but also in ordinary life, but it is truly disappointing to see how the thoughts and opinions of a single individual affect the work of a whole team.
