----- 
permalink: ruby-thanks
filters_pre: 
- redcloth
title: Thanks
comments: []

date: 2007-09-14 11:43:00 +02:00
tags: 
- ruby
- writing
- internet
type: article
toc: true
-----
It looks like my "last article":/articles/ten-reasons-to-learn-ruby was not too bad after all. Quite a few thousands of people ended up reading it since it was published nearly 10 days ago: not too bad.

It didn't get on Digg but it was featured on Dzone's front page for a while and on del.icio.us as well, hence the extra traffic.
This is the first non-PHP-related article of mine which gets this kind of attention, and to me this is quite an achievement: it kinda feels like I've been re-christened, metaphorically speaking.

I'd like to spend a few words to thank a few people who contributed to this article's popularity:

* _Halley_ from "CyberArmy.net":http://www.cyberarmy.net, who did a great job polishing the article's rough edges, as always.
* The folks at "DZone":http://www.dzone.com who voted and viewed my article. DZone seems to be truly great, by the way, I didn't realize that.
* All the people who bookmarked the article, all those who posted a comment (even the negative ones, which indeed always help) to the article.
* Peter Cooper, from "RubyInside":http://www.rubyinside.com, one of the best blogs out there, for mentioning my article in one of his "latest posts":http://www.rubyinside.com/interesting-ruby-tidbits-that-dont-warrant-separate-posts-1-600.html. This was truly a honour.
