----- 
permalink: projects
title: Projects
type: page
-----
This page lists all my _projects_. Except for a few cases, they normally are:
* open source
* programming-related
* developed using the "Ruby programming language":http://www.ruby-lang.org
* hosted on "GitHub":http://www.github.com/h3rald

- "H3RALD Web Site":/h3rald/ := This very web site, in its 8th incarnation. H3RALD.com has been operative since 2004 and through the years its backend changed from being pure vanilla HTML, to server-side PHP (Prado and CakePHP) to Ruby (Rails, Nanoc).
- "Glyph":/glyph/ := A _Rapid Document Authoring Framework_ written in Ruby that can be used to create and manage books and articles.
- "Ruby Compendium":/ruby-compendium/ := A free book aiming to help beginners learn about Ruby. It doesn't focus on learning the language, but rather on its vast ecosystem and freely available resources.
- "RawLine":/rawline/ := Rawline is a Ruby library which provides a subset of the functionality of the C Readline library. Being implemented in pure Ruby, it gives Ruby developers much more control over key bindings and word completion.
- "Concatenative":/concatenative/ := A Ruby DSL for concatenative programming. Although quite slow if compared to other concatenative languages like Factor, it implements all the most common concatenative combinator and makes it possible to use Ruby objects in a concatenative way.
- "Herald Vim Color Scheme":/herald-vim-color-scheme/ := A dark, easy-to-read color scheme for the Vim text editor. It can be used with 255, 16 or 8 colors.
